Effective August 1, 2025: Broker’s fees for rental units must be paid by the person who hired the broker or salesperson.

Best bet

Legal tactics: Tenants' rights in Massachusetts, 9 th ed., Massachusetts Law Reform Institute, 2025, with current updates (includes forms).
Housing, apartments, shelter, Mass. Legal Help.
Various topical collections that contain information and resources relating to landlord-tenant issues, including:
Eviction Rent and security deposits Repairs and bad conditions Taking your landlord to court Utilities And more...

Massachusetts laws

Main laws MGL c. 186
 Estates for years and at will (Landlord-tenant law) Related laws MGL c. 40P
 The Massachusetts rent control prohibition act MGL c. 93, § 114 Psychologically impacted properties
Sellers and brokers don't have to tell buyers or tenants about a murder or suicide in the house, or about ghosts or other paranormal activity. However, they can't lie if they are asked about it.
MGL c. 112, § 87DDD 1/2
 Real estate brokers and salesmen; persons finding dwelling accommodations for fee Effective August 1, 2025 broker's fees must be paid by the party that hires the broker, which is usually the landlord.
MGL c. 140, § 22 Lodging house
A lodging house, or boarding house, is a house that rents out individual rooms to 4 or more people.
MGL c. 175, § 99 (Cl. 15th A)
 Standard form and content of policies or contracts insuring against loss or damage by fire or by fire and lightning
An insurance policy for a multi-unit apartment building must provide coverage up to a limit of $750 for each rental unit to cover the actual costs of relocation of any tenant or lawful occupant displaced by fire or by damage resulting from fire.
Refer also to:

Law about adverse possession (sometimes called "squatters' rights").

Massachusetts regulations

Department of Public Health 105 CMR 410
 State sanitary code chapter II: Minimum standards of fitness for human habitation
Details the key requirements for housing, including kitchens, bathrooms, electricity, ceiling height, and much more. Sections of particular note:
105 CMR 410.260 Means of egress
Explains the responsibilities of both landlord and tenant for the maintenance and clearing of a residence's means of egress (such as stairs, pathways, fire escapes, etc.).
105 CMR 410.420 Habitability requirements
Is your apartment big enough? Includes the requirements for the amount of space per person.
105 CMR 410.550 Elimination of pests
Explains the responsibilities of both landlord and tenant for the control and elimination of pests.
Attorney General 940 CMR 3 General regulations 940 CMR 3.17 Landlord-tenant
Regulations for consumer protection from unfair or deceptive acts or practices by landlords. Specifies prohibited acts by landlords in the areas of conditions, notices, rental agreements, security deposits, evictions, and more. Subsection (6)(e) outlines when a landlord may enter the tenant's home.

Selected cases

Selected court cases on the topic of landlord-tenant issues

Forms

Landlord-tenant forms available online.
Many print legal materials in the law libraries' collections also include forms, and you can submit requests for copies to be sent to you. If you're not sure what you are looking for, contact the law libraries for assistance.

Report a code violation

In Massachusetts city and town local health authorities (LHA) enforce the state housing code, 105 CMR 410.
"Complaints regarding housing violations must be addressed to the LHA, which may be the board of health, health department, or inspectional services department. The LHA is responsible for conducting inspections, issuing orders to correct, and enforcement to ensure violations are corrected." --
A guide for occupants: Enforcement of the Massachusetts housing code, MA Department of Public Health, 2016.

Web sources

General
Attorney General's guide to landlord and tenant rights, Mass. Attorney General.
Covers terms of a rental agreement, security deposits and other payments, sanitary code requirements, evictions, and discrimination.
Overview of landlord-tenant laws in Massachusetts, Nolo, 2024.
"Both landlords and tenants should be able to deal with many legal questions and problems without a lawyer, once they understand the basics of state law. This overview of key landlord-tenant laws in Massachusetts will get you started." Bed bugs and other pests
Bed bug guideline: Prevention and extermination, City of Boston, 2022.
Explains responsibilities of landlords and tenants in dealing with bed bugs.
Pest control guidance and bed bug FAQs, Mass. Bureau of Climate and Environmental Health.
Pest control guidance for renters
Pest control guidance for rental property owners and managers
Frequently asked questions about bed bugs Broker's fees
Frequently asked questions about residential rental broker’s fees, Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities.
" As of August 1, 2025, broker’s fees for rental units must be paid by the person who hired the broker or salesperson. If you didn’t hire a broker or salesperson, you shouldn’t be paying their fee. This means that if a landlord chooses to hire a broker or salesperson, they are responsible for paying that broker or salesperson themselves."
Governor Healey, Attorney General Campbell warn against illegal renter-paid broker fees, Mass. Governor and Office of the Attorney General, May 21, 2026.
Encourages renters to file complaints against brokers and landlords attempting to charge fees against state law.
Complaints
Anyone who thinks they’ve been improperly charged a broker’s fee can contact:
Massachusetts Attorney General’s Consumer Advocacy and Response Division Submit your consumer complaint online, or Call 617-727-8400 for assistance
Mass. Division of Occupational Licensure (DOL)
File a complaint against an occupational board licensee, or
For questions, call the DOL’s Office of Investigations at 617-701-8756 Mold
Guidance to control excess moisture and mold, Mass. Bureau of Climate and Environmental Health.
Guidance for occupants
Guidance for rental property owners and managers Landlords
How to be a landlord in Massachusetts and avoid legal trouble, A. Joseph Ross, J.D., revised May 2020.
This extensive document covers everything from screening tenants through eviction, including utilities, lead paint, security deposits, domestic violence, and more.
Landlords, Mass.gov.
A topical list of state government pages that relate to landlord issues.
MassLandlords.net
Everything you need to know to be a landlord. "MassLandlords is the landlord trade association for Massachusetts. We have lease agreements, eviction notices, and every other kind of landlord help you need to run a successful small business. Membership is open to new, current, and prospective owners, managers, and service providers." Some resources available through the site do not require a membership to access.
Tenants Guide me: I have a housing problem, Mass. Legal Resource Finder.
"Answer a few questions. We will give you information to help you understand what your legal rights and responsibilities are. We will also give you a you a list of steps you can take that give you more control over what happens next." Housing code checklist (from
Booklets: Representing yourself in an eviction ), Mass. Law Reform Institute, 2026.
"The state Sanitary Code sets the minimum requirements for rental housing. The Housing Code Checklist will help figure out if your home meets these requirements."
How to be a tenant in Massachusetts and avoid getting ripped off, A. Joseph Ross, J.D., revised May 2020.
Covers all the key issues for a tenant, including security deposits, utilities, lead paint, landlords entering the apartment, and more.
Moving tips for tenants, A. Joseph Ross, J.D., October 2020.
Precautions to take when moving, regardless of your relationship with your landlord.
Renters/Tenants, Mass.gov.
A topical list of state government pages relating to tenant issues.
The tenant's helper: A handbook for renters, 7 th ed., 2018, City of Somerville.
Covers information on security deposits, evictions, discrimination, roommates, and tenants' rights after the sale of a building.

Print sources

General
Landlord and tenant law: With forms (Mass. practice v.33-34), 3 rd ed., West Group, 2000, with supplements.
Residential and commercial landlord-tenant practice in Massachusetts, 5 th ed., MCLE, 2024.
Landlords
Every landlord's guide to finding great tenants by Janet Portman, 5 th ed., Nolo, 2020.
Every landlord's guide to managing property by Michael Boyer, 5 th ed., Nolo, 2025.
( eBook available with library card ) Every landlord's legal guide by Ann O'Connell, 17 th ed., Nolo, 2024. ( eBook available with library card ) Every landlord's tax deduction guide by Stephen Fishman, 21 st ed., Nolo, 2025. ( eBook available with library card )
First-time landlord: Your guide to renting out a single-family home by Ilona Bray, 7 th ed., Nolo, 2025. ( eBook available with library card ) Lease drafting in Massachusetts, 6 th ed., MCLE, 2025.
Leases & rental agreements by Ann O'Connell, 16 th ed., Nolo, 2025. ( eBook available with library card ) Tenants Every tenant's legal guide by Janet Portman, 10 th ed., Nolo, 2021. ( 2024 eBook available with library card ) Renters' rights by Janet Portman, 10 th ed., Nolo, 2021. ( 2024 eBook available with library card )

Contact

Online

 Library locations and phone numbers

 Chat with a law librarian online

Email a reference librarian:

Email Trial Court Law Libraries at lawlibraries@jud.state.ma.us

Last updated:

June 2, 2026

Related

 Massachusetts law about Airbnbs and other short-term rentals

 Massachusetts law about housing (owning & renting)

 Massachusetts law about "squatters' rights"

 Chat or text with a law librarian

 Request documents from the law libraries